202407101320

Status: #idea

Tags: #oil #neoliberalism #military/aid #capitalism #globalization 

Since the 1940s [[Oil]] was used for political tactics. An oil embargo, in it's basic form, can be a price hike in oil prices, or a complete severance of oil, or a withholding of certain amounts of oil to importing countries; it is mostly propagandistic – an attempt towards a political goal. What is at stake in oil embargoes is/was (and still is) the ability to keep goods, peoples, and ideas out of territories by securing borders, all the while maintaining a flow of goods; Israel-Palestine conflict could be seen as the fuel and ignition to this problem. Oil price increases hold responsibility for recessions, inflation, reduced productivity, and lower economic growth. But it is not the sole indicator. 

The 73’ embargo was a culminating event that led to global shifts in Oil policies. The embargo shifted more international policy than US-Israeli policy (in fact, the oil embargo increased the U.S's support towards Israel). During this era the market showed how much attention it places on speculative oil prices and production. Contingency and uncertainty became the forefront. Globalization put imperial [[Sovereignty]] into question.
	Gulf oil produced new forms of migrations across Asian nations. It is also interrelated with debt, growing transborder migration, and anthropogenic climate change

The 73’ oil embargo placed vast amounts of financial power to the oil producing states such as Saudi, Kuwait, Iran, and Abu Dhabi, but more notably to the U.S and London financial operators. The OAPEC group had seen tremendous profits in their oil price hike, which they could not recycle through their own sectors (as mentioned above). The U.S was already will prepared to do their bidding. The U.S private banks were already set up to recycle their petrodollars through their system. By 1974 the U.S had moved away from restrictions for the flow of funds in and out of the U.S. This is largely due to the U.S’s breach of the Bretton Woods system (which was on a path to its death, as the [[Neoliberalism|neoliberal]] order was under way); for example, allowing private financiers to operate in London as unregulated offshore centers. This was in tandem with the U.S’s restructuring of lending to borrowing countries through the IMF and World Bank; furthermore, the basis of a currency was dependent upon its trade balance, the IMF, and government, but by the time the embargo took place, currencies were dependent upon the states creditworthiness within international private financial markets (i.e., private banks now had a role within the international monetary system). In short, other capitalistic states were trapped into the U.S dollar and private banking system. The U.S was given economic weight during a period of global stagflation.

Yet the economy had only fallen into a deeper recession. Between the years 74’ through 85’ the U.S had experienced a low rate of growth which was in tandem with a steady increase in crude oil imports. This “coincidence” prompted a series of theoretical links between oil prices and economic productivity which exist to this day. A low rate of growth coincided with high inflation, unemployment, and a stripping of social provisions. Thus, in spite of massive profits and available funds the recession persisted because the years which preceded the 73’ embargo and the years after, in which the changes in international and national financial relations, marked the upper class’s renewed energy for a shift in class relationships. The surplus profits that oil producing countries were seeing gave the NY investment [[Banks]], which recycled their profits, other avenues of capital to sew their dollars into for more enrichment.

The U.S was put into a position in which it was not facing the monetary constraints of other countries: large U.S corporations could buy companies abroad or invest without the constraints of payments; venture capitalist could send large amounts of funds into portfolio investments; companies that traded and imported in dollars no longer had to worry about exchange rates, like companies in countries that did not; the Federal Reserve gained the ability to control international interest rates by changing domestic interest rates (this had a powerful effect on other economies); the U.S held sway within the IMF and World Bank with European cooperation, which meant that when international financial operator were reaching bankruptcy they could be bailed out by borrowing countries (such as Latin American countries in the 80s). NY investment companies looked at U.S. imperial strategies in order to look for investment opportunities in order to protect their foreign operations. The story of the 70s is the increasing pace of Wall Street taking down the barriers for entering into the domestic and international financial system in order to continually reshape financial systems
	- it is the narrative of a new international monetary regime.

The oil crisis made issues of energy security (within the Middle East, western Europe, and Japan), globalization, contingency, and governance, into more pressing political issues. The embargo also placed the importance of oil (and energy) within modern economics, today this is referred to as petro-knowledge. The drive for petro-knowledge led many western countries to coalesce energy sectors into one comprehensive program or sector. Similarly, the oil crisis forced capital rich countries to band together to focus on political issues. Today, we formally know this as the G7 group (formed in 75’, although talks began in 73’), informally we may know it as the group that is willing to be coerced by U.S.

The oil embargo was ineffective as oil was still being shipped to the effected countries. The embargo was effective in its ability to shift economic policies in order to favor profitability and energy-market security. The embargo had disrupted communication and interaction routines within the oil economy, which created a moment of contingency and uncertainty. This led to unregulation so that the anxieties of business men could be soothed. 

What the 73’ embargo produced was a crisis of overaccumulation. These crisis can be relieved by either a temporal shift or spatial fix; either an absorption of capital/labor surplus through long term projects or a dispersion or exportation of capital/labor into new or profitable spaces. In the instance of this embargo it was the latter (NY investment banks).


---
# References
[[The Prize, Oil]] by Daniel Yergin
[[Brief History of Neoliberalism]] by David Harvey
[[Three decades after the Oil Embargo]] by A. F. Alhajji
[[Planetary Specters]] by Neel Ahuja