202409031243

Status: #idea

Tags: 

The Iranian revolution was a part of a number of events: unorganized strikes and demonstrations that began in the mid-70s along with the political and economic oil crisis. After the [[Oil Embargo (1973)|oil embargo of 1973]] the government multiplied their oil revenues nearly 9x (from $2.4 billion to $18.5 billion). "The Fifth Development Plan was revised to account for an increase of some 156 percent for expenditures on the oil industry, 112.5 percent for the gas sector, and 95 percent for other industries (only 2.4 per-cent for education and 0 percent for provincial development)" (Kamrava, The Modern Middle East, 147). 

This would crumble within a two years and the monarchy was put to question. By 1975, the government was in a $1.7 billion dollar deficit , a fall of $6 billion from the previous year. Mismanagement and corruption throughout the government began to take an effect.

Prior to the mid-70s political crisis, another important event had occurred within Iran, the Land Reform Law of 1962, which would grow into the White Revolution. This had brought "the nationalization of forest; the sale of state-owned enterprises to the public; workers' profit sharing in 20 percent of net corporate earnings; the extension of voting rights to women; and the formation of a Literacy Corp of fifty thousand high school graduates to be sent to villages to teach" (Kamrava, 146). The conservative clergy was vehemently against this campaign as they viewed it as a demonstration against their positions. Of the most vocal was the Rouhollah Khomeini, who was exiled in 1964 for how his public disagreements. 

Over the years public demonstrations would grow, but their ability to convene was constantly being suppressed by SAVAK. As Khomeini was in exile he would write letters to clerics who would voice his opposition to the state within Mosque, one of the few spaces where dissent could actually be heard. 

The White Revolution by the mid-70s had become another ruse for the Shah, but he was losing support. By 1977, the Shah had appointed and fired a number of Prime Ministers in an attempt to save the Iranian state.  As the state was in an economic deficit and was dysfunctional, and as public opposition grew (the middle class targeting the government and demanding accountability and an end to the corruption), along with the sycophants within the Majles, the government found itself ill equipped to manage the multiple civil crisis at hand. The government found itself unable to properly respond to the hundreds of thousands of demonstrators who were in the streets by 1978-9. 

In January of 1979, the Shah would flee Iran under medical reasons, and by February 1, Khomeini returned to Iran. The army would collapse a few weeks after. In March of that year, a referendum was held where a simple question was asked: "Should Iran be an Islamic Republic?" 98.2% ballots casted yes. Between 1979 to 1988, Iran would limit its own political space, and get rid of the enemies of the "revolution." The Majles, Presidency, and the military would be controlled by one group. 

Meanwhile, the old monarch looking for a suitable host was traveling from country to country. Rockefeller and Henry Kissinger were pressing Jimmy Carter for the U.S to host him, and he was finally allowed to come to the U.S for medical treatment in October of 1979. Two weeks after his arrival in NY, a protest erupted in Tehran where the U.S embassy was taken control of and its staff became hostages. 

U.S diplomats were held hostage for 444 days. Under pressure and angry, Bazargan (Prime Minister) resigned over the hostages. After his resignation, Khomeini transferred power over to the Revolutionary Council whose responsibility was to prepare the elections for the Assembly of Experts, who were in charge of drafting the new constitution. The assembly was largely made up of IRP (Islamic Republic Party). The new constitution sanctified the Khomeini's position as the Supreme Jurisconsult (Velayat Faqih). "As its Article 5 stipulated, 'The governance of the nation devolves upon the just and pious Faqih who is acquainted with the circumstances of his age; courageous, resourceful, and possessed of administrative ability; and recognized and accepted as leader by the majority of the people'" (Kamrava, 157). 

The hostage situation allowed for Ayatollah's absolute hold over polity and the elimination of his rivals. A hostage deal was only negotiated when Reagan's campaign manager William Casey had a struck a deal with Iranians close to Khomeini. The agreement was that the hostages would not be released until after the elections. "In return, the United States sanctioned Israel’s sale of American military equipment to Iran, which it badly needed in its war against Iraq. This explains why, in negotiating the hostages’ release, the Iranian side was willing to settle for ﬁnancial terms far less advantageous than they could have demanded. Later the Reagan White House repeated the same idea—swapping hostages for military equipment through Israel—in what came to be known as the 'Iran-Contra Affair'" (Kamrava, 160). 

Meanwhile, a war along the border with Iraq had compelled the Iranian regime to take out, through force, its domestic opponents, specifically the Mujahedeen guerrillas. In 1980 they had managed to kill off a number of IRP political figures and proponents. In retaliation the regime executed over hundred thousand people. Other parties were banned or quelled as well. The government had seized control over the electronic and printed media. No one had the power to voice the political dissent. 

"Accordingly, the revolutionary state’s social and cultural agendas reflected Khomeini’s very conservative, narrow interpretation of Islam. Women had to observe the Islamic dress code in the strictest sense, and many were encouraged to leave the workforce and to resume duties at home. A cultural revolution kept the universities closed for a number of years to ensure their puriﬁcation and their observance of the regime’s Islam. By the mid to late 1980s, the chaos of the earlier years had subsided, and the Islamic Republic, with regular elections to the presidency and the Majles, had reached a fairly stable level of institutional consolidation" (161).

In 1988 the Iran-Iraq war would end and a year late in 1989 Khomeini would die; a new era in Iranian politics was set in motion. President Ali Akbar Hasemi Rafsenjani cabinet was called "the Cabinet of Reconstruction." Rafsenjani would openly embrace the idea of new contributions from around the world: "For the sake of the reconstruction of this vast country and for renovation of war damages, we are prepared to accept the participation of friends and governments who will deal with us ...without any expansionist and colonialist motives" (Kamrava, 162). Iran revised its constitution so that it can change the development of its institutions (about 50 amendments were made), and the government shifted how it would improve its own economy. For example, the role of the President and Prime Minister were more clearly delineated (drawing division in power). 

Muhammad Khatami was elected President in 1997, and his "presidency gave rise to a cultural revolution, or, more aptly, a cultural rejuvenation. The more permissive social atmosphere unleashed creative, artistic, and intellectual energies that for two decades had not been allowed to ﬂourish. Some of the more arbitrary restrictions on various artistic endeavors, such as ﬁlm making and composing music, were either loosened or were removed altogether" (Kamrava, 164).

 The Iranian revolution was nested in an international devolvement of the Pahlavi state and an internal conservative initiative that was set out to establish a theocracy in Iran. The "revolution" was fueled by a weak economy, public dissent and demonstrations, and foreign interference. Both the Pahlavi states, with their economic façades built out of [[Oil|oil]], police surveillance, support from the United States, and the ostentatiousness of one individual centered, became reflective of their derelictions. The revolution that would come after their fall would be of repression, suppression, the elimination and rejection of oppositions, and the creation of institutions that would consolidate the new theocracy and cement their rule. 




---
# References
[[The Modern Middle East]]