202404061621

Status: #book

Tags: #theory 

Title: Planetary Specters: Race, Migration, and Climate Change in the Twenty-First Century

Author: Neel Ahuja

Citation:
Ahuja, Neel. Planetary Specters: Race, Migration, and Climate Change in the Twenty-First Century. United States, University of North Carolina Press, 2021.


---
# References
# Planetary Specters

## Introduction

-   The migration crises in 2015 -- 2018 in the Mediterranean and
    Mexican border was presumed to be the cause of environmental
    changes, but this concept is exclusionary based on actual accounts
    of why migrants left to begin with. They don't cite environmental
    disasters because of its abstract temporal discourse --
    environmental change is a narrative given to the lost narrative

-   This book is a critique of the transnational discourse around
    climate migration

-   The narrative of climate migrants given to us by NGOs, and the
    media, displaces, obfuscates, and blurs the narrative of how an oil
    economy, economic inequalities, warfare, and neoliberal
    policies/imperial interventions have been implemented into large
    poorer populations; which is reflective of a racial disposability by
    way of capitalist order (accumulation by dispossession)

-   The trace between neoliberal economic policy, race, and
    environmental destruction emerges in the 70s when the
    transnationalization of labor and trade was heavily influenced by an
    ever more emerging oil economy

-   Migrant crisis must be understood as an unresolved racial crisis
    that derives from neocolonial divisions in the international market
    system

-   Climate change is configured a security threat due to mass
    population movement

    -   Migrants are given a narrative that stems from security planning
        that seeks to ensure U.S. and European neoliberal ways of future
        living

        -   After the dissolution of the soviet union, the U.S. needed a
            new threat to ensure its global dominance

    -   Environmental degradation, stripped social provisions, and
        weakened infrastructures appear as forces of rising extremism
        (see page 9)

    -   Racism is thus fueled into conceptions of time; migrants
        appearing as disrupters and destroyers of everyday life

-   See pages 28-31 for the extraction of oil

"Questioning emerging security discourses about the links between
climate change and migration is necessary to reframe the manner in which
militarized northern borders contribute to the current sense of a
"migration crisis." Rather than migrants themselves, the forces of
capitalist enterprise and military intervention are the most prominent
border-crossing agents today, forces that generate growing numbers of
southern migrants as their unacknowledged supplement." (7)
## Chapter Two - The Changing Wealth of Nations

-   a large portion of "great acceleration" of fossil fuels emerged out
    of the 73' oil crisis and after

-   Gulf oil may have produced new forms of migration through the SWANA
    region

    -   It also interrelated with international debt, growing
        transborder migration, and anthropogenic climate change

-   A lot of debt migration can be equated to climate migration

\"embargo on oil exports in 1973 in protest of northern support for
Israel in the October War, the resulting petroleum shortages in the
United States and the price spike on the world market transformed the
structure of international finance and reoriented political
relationships among oil-producing states, oil-dependent southern
nations, and oil-consuming economic powers such as Japan and the United
States." (70-71)

-   there is a specific racial character in all of this

    -   labor structures in oil fields developed forms of Asian
        migration, which is central to international systems of trade,
        commerce, and production

"Such migration commonly works along two pathways: (1) from
agriculture-dependent rural or coastal areas to cities, and (2) from
poorer countries in South and Southeast Asia to wealthier ones in West
Asia." (71)

-   The South Asian-Persian Gulf migration corridor is a direct cause of
    this

-   The racial and gender labor structure of this region follows the
    earlier colonial labor strategies

"it is possible to understand the story of the rise of neoliberalism as
planetary capitalist logic and its evolving configuration of racialized
migration politics." (71)

-   Labor shifts that occurred in more agrarian countries resulted in
    what is known as "climate migration."

-   Tracking oil, race, and environmental change allows for
    understanding of the geopolitical transformations that connect South
    Asian and Western Asian to Northern states that now dominated the
    political and finance systems

-   This neoliberal phase is another extension of racial capitalism that
    is reliant upon the growth of carbon emissions and the
    internationalization of oil as an asset that is valued on its
    financial and physical capacities

    -   A link to the growth of U.S power

    -   The petrodollar has amplified U.S military expansion, arms
        trade, and state security -- all of which have allowed the war
        on terror to persist alongside its environmental security

"the imperial relations of oil generate forms of racial displacement and
vulnerability to violence, reflecting the productive role of surplus
Asian labor in the maintenance of capitalism's systemic inequalities."
(72)

*How is race and capital related?* (nothing new, Black studies have
covered this well enough)

"Capitalism thus fueled racialization, which was central to its
operating logics. Slavery and colonization were not simply premodern or
feudal arrangements but were systematically expanded as colonial states
developed extractive enterprise linking intensified control of land to
intensified control of labor." (74)

"one key takeaway is a growing emphasis on how racial differentiation is
structurally significant to capitalism rather than an abstraction that
might be transcended through establishment of more equal economic
relations." (74)

-   Racial capitalism = the racialization of human national, religious,
    linguistic, and ethnic differentiation as a condition of systemic
    expansion and consolidation

"Cedric Robinson argues that the rise of the capitalist system--- first
within medieval Europe and later across the Atlantic during colonial
expansion of the plantation economy beginning in the sixteenth
century--- required the consolidation of social identities as groups of
merchants and traders attempted to reproduce profits by establishing
competitive distance trades in raw materials, agricultural products,
manufactured goods, and enslaved peoples." (74)

Two forms of differentiation became apparent:

1.  The accumulation of labor was reliant upon a difference from those
    organizing the industry, as it allowed for easier exploitation

2.  As industry progressed and grew, difference shifted from smaller
    ethnic groups to larger abstracted difference that became linked to
    land and nations, and by the 18^th^ century, continents

-   This form of difference is linked to the conquest of the Americas,
    the stripping of indigenous lands, slavery, and financial networks
    throughout Europe.

-   Robinson sees difference as a precursor to capital and
    post-enlightenment science

    "class forms the universal categories of human social
    differentiation, while race refers to particular contexts in which
    laboring classes are pitted against one another in the relations of
    production ... the theory of racial capitalism argues that racial
    differences are reproduced precisely because they are the means for
    structural expansion and consolidation, including through the
    connections generated among the control of labor, the colonization
    of land, militarism, and the centralization of power in the racial
    state. For Robinson, "the tendency of European civilization through
    capitalism was thus not to homogenize but to differentiate---to
    exaggerate regional, subcultural, and dialectical differences into
    'racial' ones." (75)

-   Gulf oil production is nothing but a repetition of a past.

    -   In 49' Aramco deported Pakistani workers from Saudi as they
        represented communism (evil capital) and racial discrimination

    -   Aramco also has a history of segregated work camps (an echo of
        segregation in the U.S.)

    -   Control of race was central to oil production and control for
        the U.S

    -   In the 2010s , Saudi deported a large swath of workers in order
        to domestic labor (Saudization)

    -   The UAE had similar reports as Indian workers carried out labor
        actions

    -   These are strategies that have originated in white supremacist
        statecraft apparent in early U.S immigration laws

-   oooooo I just figured out how the camera is a melancholic of the
    past !

    "Although mass immigration is sometimes depicted as part of the
    "resource curse" that produces various governance problems for major
    oil-producing countries, the accumulation of migrant labor in Saudi
    Arabia, Yemen, the United Arab Emirates, Kuwait, Bahrain, and other
    oil producers in and around the Persian Gulf has long been an
    explicit strategy that appeared to serve state interests: South
    Asian workers, especially Muslim ones, were viewed as docile,
    alienable from family structures, disconnected from nationalist or
    Islamist political movements in the region, and controllable by work
    contract." (77)

-   the Kalafa system is reflective of early colonial contracts that
    proliferated throughout slavery

    -   to receive a visa you need a sponsor; someone who controls your
        movements and labor

-   The control of oil is not merely the attempt of access to cheap oil,
    as it often noted in the U.S and British military and political
    ventures in Iran, Iraq, and neighboring states, but the desire to
    control and create a monopoly in oil reserves to LIMIT its
    extraction and inflate prices

-   The logic of wealth is temporal

    "The overriding desire was control of land in a system that would
    require minimal investment by ensuring limited production." (78)

    "Such an organization of oil lands involved a kind of franchise
    colonial model that structured valorization of oil in terms of
    intricate geographic divisions linked to the emerging structures of
    colonial states." (78)

-   The value of the extraction and organization of an oil economy is
    based off of borders and nation states that reflect a settler
    colonialism

-   Waste is often attributed to settler colonialism

-   But the case of oil is slightly eschewed. It sought out land for oil
    , rather than fill a "waste land" of inhabitants

    -   The erasure of indigenous land is not so much a product of oil
        extraction, as the removal of land was not necessary in order to
        make it productive -- the reflection of settler colonialism in
        the SWANA region is different

        "What type of colonial racial form did this produce given that
        low labor input enabled large energy output and thus large
        profitability?" (80, see pages 80-82)

-   The answer lies in tracing the relationship between oil and state
    formation in the region and beyond; specifically, in how oil was
    implemented in international order during the interwar periods

-   The technology that produces oil is relatively closed off to workers
    (pipelines, oil tankers, etc.); those that control these
    technologies is rather small. There are certain points that can be
    utilized by workers to create unrest

    "Regardless of the fact that a certain potential for labor unrest
    remained, the low relative concentration of labor in the oil sector
    conformed well with the fact that British and other colonial powers
    no longer sought to use white settler population expansion as a
    safety valve for the disposal of convicts and other domestic
    populations configured as surplus." (80)

-   Colonial powers sought to use the region against itself. Colonial
    concessions.

-   Oil firms had to cut deals with the state (ex: Ibn Saud and the
    defeat of *muwahhidun*)

    "According to this history, the resulting alliance between U.S. and
    British colonial oil firms, the emergent Saudi state, and evangelist
    religious movements in Arabia thus reflected a client patronage
    system that emerged around oil in the region, tying carbon
    production to both emergent ethnoreligious identity and the
    generation of dependent states that purported to represent localized
    forms of governance and morality." (81)

-   Once these deals/agreements were made transnational labor forces
    could come in

-   Preference was given to Arab's but by the end of the Indian
    indenture system, British companies began to import "Indian"
    workers. Specifically to Iraq and Kuwait. By the 40s 7,768 workers
    were categorized as Indian, employed in various Gulf oil producing
    states

-   Aramco, and the state controlled unionization and protest, while
    also stratifying labor forces and paying them on a declining scale

-   This was still practice post WWII (after public outcry towards
    racism, eugenics, and labor practices)

    The formation of the states, labor systems, and colonial concessions
    are the link between a racialized notion of the relationship between
    sovereignty and oil.

-   Oil profits are partially subject to the articulation of Islamic
    identity with the identity of the state, and those same profits are
    what control political resistance and worker solidarity

-   The production of oil of Post WWII can help articulate how it was
    utilized to perpetuate neocolonial transformations in labor and
    finance on a global scale

-   West Asian oil production, south Asian migrant labor, and east Asian
    manufacturing all played a role in transforming the logic of U.S
    power

    "It is necessary to recall that "Asia" remains an over burdened
    signifier, subject to the breadth of colonial mapping and the
    agendas of area studies research that reproduces it as an arena of
    difference and intervention." (82)

-   The U.S became a global power by not holding a reserve of gold like
    London, but by loaning its money

-   The interasian migratory paths begins with the transformation of
    petrodollars in the 70s

-   Aug 15, 71', Nixon ended the Bretton Woods regime of monetary
    policy; the U.S. would not exchange the dollar for gold

    -   The U.S. had debt during the 70s due to the Vietnam war, and
        European countries began to float their currencies which
        revealed the weakness of the dollar. Nixon strove to pit the
        dollar against speculation

    -   Soon after a recession followed

    -   As the dollar was the currency for international oil
        transactions, the depreciation of the dollar lowered oil
        revenues for the producers

    -   In response, OPEC fixed the price of oil to gold

    -   True wealth came during the embargo from OAPEC in 73

        -   Over five months, they controlled oil exports and production
            cuts which exponentially drove the price of oil up (5x)

        -   The influx of oil dollars transformed their economies

            -   Saudi's growth was about 27.8 percent

-   The oil profits and investments in infrastructure created a division
    among non-aligned/third world countries

    -   Global inflation devasted countries that were formerly
        colonized. Countries that were dependent on imported goods from
        oil-fueled economies, and that were dependent on extractive
        resources

        -   Countries that were hit the hardest were given predatory
            loans by the World Bank, IMF, and donor states. As they were
            forced payment on these debts, they resorted to neocolonial
            industries (tourism, tax exemption, and private ownership
            over land extractive enterprises)

        -   This prevented social investments and increased economic
            inequality in agriculture/mineral dependent states

        -   In these locations there was pressure to export migrants as
            a source for foreign capital remittance; the global south
            became a prime mover in the "human capital" world system

            "Attempts to develop state sovereignty over oil in the Gulf
            in the 1970s thus failed to develop a broader third world
            project of cooperation among southern elites, instead
            exacerbating divisions between oil-rich states and
            agriculture- or mining-dependent states in Asia, Africa, and
            Latin America." (85)

            "If the oil boycott was ostensibly an effort by
            majority-Arab states to counter U.S.-funded Israeli settler
            colonialism in and beyond Palestine, the actual effects of
            the policy occurred broadly in the international system
            rather than affecting U.S. policy in Israel." (85)

-   First, The narrow action of oil producing countries created a
    division between other non-aligned countries by only increasing
    profits in their natural resource rather than collectively creating
    profit in each others. Profits in oil was the demise of others.

    "Second, despite producing a supply crisis that briefly affected the
    U.S. consumer market, the recycling of Gulf petrodollars back to the
    United States (as Gulf states moved profits to U.S. banks and began
    importing more goods, including arms) ultimately helped to sustain
    the dollar and to secure the central place of the United States in
    international finance." (86)

    "U.S. government debts could continue to be sustained due to the
    maintenance of the dollar as reserve currency." (Ibid.)

    "The United States remains the only country whose balance of payment
    deficits does not substantially affect its currency or capacity for
    financing." (86)

-   Much of the petrodollars went to Northern banks, bailing them out
    and allowing predatory loans to the south

-   States that accepted loans were required to shrink the size of the
    state and accept trade liberalization

-   National sovereignty over oil only further entrenched the south to
    neoliberalism, economic equalities, and dependency across borders

    "the 1973 oil embargo may not exactly constitute a preplanned
    strategy of empire, but it does pre sent a case in which U.S.
    officials and Gulf states worked in concert in ways that used oil to
    buttress U.S. power in the world system, which resulted in massive
    forms of war-driven displacement and racialized contests over
    migration in the present." (88)

-   A continuation of U.S. empire through the 70s crisis that created
    financial dependencies b/w the U.S. and Asian economies

-   The dollar as the world reserve currency perpetuated and increased
    borrowing for military ventures, more arms importation (within gulf
    states), and the development of Indian ocean and pacific shipping
    routes, which, helped establish a transnational system of
    manufactured goods with an increase in domestic coal consumption
    (electronics, automobiles, textiles, etc.)

-   Migration became a key adaptation for several Asian countries that
    faced the consequences of the embargo

    Configuring oil today

-   Robinson was attentive to shifts in accumulative labor in the
    Mediterranean during the rise of capitalism to the kidnapping of
    enslaved labor in the Atlantic trade. One of key components to the
    system of racial differentiation and its management is spatial
    alienation

-   Stepping further into Robinson's context and placing it within the
    present, there is a notable shift in international migrants in the
    neoliberal era, in tandem with the spread of the industry,
    reorganization of agrarian land, and export oriented manufacturing.

-   New waves of migrants followed post WWII, following changes in
    citizenship laws in colonial states, and economic changes in African
    and Asia from the 40s to the 80s.

-   This is also in tandem with re-urbanization of cities and
    repopulation. See page 90 for more information

-   Environmental pressures generated by oil economies can also be seen
    as a contributing factor to migration. Coal has been a significant
    producer of carbon emissions, but with the last two centuries, oil
    can be accounted for two thirds of the carbon emissions.

-   A free market ideology was generated after the fall of the soviet
    union and the term globalization became a positive effect for human
    development -- but these expressions ignored for key facets of
    neoliberal transformation

    -   One, the expanded economic dependency and deprivation wrought by
        the debt crisis affecting poorer countries

    -   Two, the use of migration as a solution to the mass
        pauperization of the poor

    -   Three, the externalization of the violent effects of amplified
        fossil fuel consumption into the biosphere

    -   Four, the centering of oil in international finance

-   Carbon-fueled forms of capitalism were essential in producing the
    myth of globalization and modernity -- all the while racial
    capitalism was suggestive of uneven development

-   Accumulation by dispossession is foundation to emergent logics of
    finance

    "A key element of these logics has been the proliferation of debt as
    a manner of securitizing the militarized extraction of labor and
    land. Irreducible to processes of elimination and exclusion aimed
    respectively at expropriating native land and accumulating mi grant
    labor, finance's racial logic involves corralling commodities,
    labor, and assets into ever more speculative and securitized
    instruments to promote circulation. Because the logic of
    financialization tends toward expansion of debt and proliferation of
    speculative bubbles that recast the value and profit capacity for
    different commodities, fixed assets, and enterprises, it has been
    transformative in intensifying the effects of enclosures and other
    racial regimes of property that displace poor people, rendering
    growing populations as surplus."

-   Racial capitalism attributes moral failure not only to people but to
    places, similar one can attribute environmental crisis from space
    into time; the states that are migrant concentrated, or migrant
    fled, especially in environmental regions may appear as undeveloped
    and in need of industrialization and urbanization that rich
    oil-fueled states possess

-   "Environmental racism shows how zones of environmental precarity and
    toxicity concentrate the violences of dispossession and debt" (93)

    Why is oil still a rich commodity in spite of environmental concerns
    of renewable resources as a sustainable growing commodity?

-   See/remember example of Saudi's valuation during the pandemic

-   The correlation between militarism, international trade, economic
    growth, and development is linked to fossil fuel use within the
    present

    -   Not only within rich oil producing states and the global north,
        but oil dependent poor countries as well

-   International developers and investors maintain oil as central to
    contemporary capitalism

    "this framing of southern countries as outside the time of modern
    capital remains; contemporary racial capitalism is spatially
    capacious, but its logics are deeply invested in managing the time
    of the purportedly underdeveloped nations." (95)

-   2018 report Changing Wealth of Nations notes how capitalism depletes
    a country of its environment. Natural resources become either human
    or produced capital. This involves estimating the wealth potential
    of environmental systems within particular countries. Oil producing
    states are an exception as they can produce wealth without depleting
    their assets. It can be sustained through "natural capital" rather
    than labor.

    "Reinforcing the vision of natural capital-- intensive states as
    unproductive and outside the time of modernity, such wealth
    calculation strategies fail to challenge the hegemony of the
    petrodollar and sustain the international division of debt access."
    (96)

## Conclusion

-   There is difficulty in trying to string together the histories,
    stories, and narratives that are attached to migrant stories - in
    this case, the 2018 report on the Honduran caravan, where drought,
    coups, poverty, international debt., military violence, and activist
    groups all combine to make (that) an event

-   Migrant Roots Media is a platform that combines all of these factors
    in order to create a discussion around transnational migration

-   Climate change cannot be the trigger for crisis, it reduces the
    narrative

    -   Land development and arrangements make populations more
        susceptible to climate catastrophes

-   "The history of attempts to represent "climate migration" as a
    public problem is a reflection that rural lifeworlds themselves are
    one of today's targeted geographic horizons of accumulation,
    rendered commodifiable by both the forces of climate change and
    extractivist industries that work in tandem to render growing swaths
    of humanity as surplus labor" (162)

-   The processes that expand transborder migration (oil-fueled
    development and capital expansion; rural to urban migration, which
    render rural populations as a commodity and surplus labor) and the
    inequality between zones of security (lifeboats) and zones of
    diminishing opportunities intensify the impact of climate change by
    way of social ecosystems; debt, and loss of livelihood.

-   "Unlike the security thinking arising from border imperialism, which
    tends to reinforce crisis narratives and the stereotyped discourses
    of difference reifying a nationalist or statist worldview, thinking
    about how the carbon economy, racial capitalism, and neoliberalism
    inter-sect in developing contemporary forms of international
    inequality and violence is vital when developing transnational
    methods for connecting shared struggles of people affected by
    agricultural collapse and weather disaster." (163)

-   "Neoliberalism is not an independent economic logic but a
    reproductive system reliant on racialized management of labor,
    disposing of some workers through intricate physical mobilities and
    telemobilities while recruiting other segments of vulnerable labor
    and extractable land." (170)
