202404061610

Status: #book

Tags: #theory #capitalism

Title: The Global Gamble: Washington's Faustian Bid for World Dominance

Author: Peter Gowan

Citation:
Gowan, Peter. The Global Gamble: Washington's Faustian Bid for World Dominance. United Kingdom, Verso, 1999.


---
# References
# The Global Gamble

-   The 1990s have been the decade of globalization. Some academics
    question its very existence, while others insist it is a mighty
    beast that savages all who fail to respect its needs.

-   Joe Quinlan, senior analyst for Morgan Stanley, raised the
    possibility that globalization may be coming to an end in 1998,
    stating that the biggest risks to the world economy next year were
    an unravelling of global interdependence and therefore the end of
    globalization.

-   Quinlan argues that globalization is a fragile, vulnerable creature,
    dependent upon the nurturing care of states. The way in which
    international monetary and financial relations have been redesigned
    and managed over the last quarter of a century is one of the central
    motors of globalization.

-   We call the international monetary regime that has existed since
    1973 a regime, although it is not a regime in quasi-juridical sense.

-   The Dollar-Wall Street Regime is an international monetary regime
    that has operated both as an international \'economic regime\' and
    as a potential instrument of economic statecraft.

-   The history of international monetary and financial relations of the
    last quarter of a century gives us no key to understanding the
    contemporary problems in the advanced capitalist economies. The
    changes initiated by the Nixon administration in international
    monetary and financial affairs were the outcome of international
    political conflicts won by the American government.

-   For understanding international monetary and financial relations, no
    algebra, geometry, arithmetic or statistics is needed.

-   The essay is in five parts. The first part discusses the meaning of
    capital markets, and the second part looks at the new mechanisms
    established for international monetary relations by the Nixon
    administration.

-   The relationship between the power of markets and the power of
    states is not one mainly marked by antagonism. The DWSR changed the
    internal economics, politics and sociology of states and their
    international linkages.

-   The third part of the essay looks at how the Dollar-Wall Street
    Regime has changed the US domestic financial, economic and political
    systems.

-   In the fourth part, we try to place the DWSR and its effects into
    the framework of international politics in the early 1990s, and
    argue that the United States used the DWSR to tackle its key
    challenge in East Asia.

-   In the fifth part we argue that the US Treasury\'s intervention in
    South Korea was responsible for the subsequent Indonesian collapse,
    and that this action set in motion the triggers that turned the East
    Asian crisis into a global financial crisis during 1998.

-   Most notions of globalization focus on the growing mobility of
    capital across the globe in the \'global capital market\', but the
    term \'capital market\' is analytically incoherent because it
    embraces radically different phenomena in the field of finance.

-   Common sense language associates the word capital with funds for
    productive investment, which produces sellable items.

-   One of the central confusions concerning globalization is the
    widespread belief that trillions of dollars are bouncing back and
    forth across the globe, assisting the development of the productive
    sector of capitalism.

-   The current forms of \'capital markets\' are not functionally
    indispensable investment mechanisms, because very large flows of
    funds into productive investment do not pass through the so-called
    \'capital markets\' at all.

-   The confusion about the role of capital markets is linked to
    another, concerning mergers and acquisitions. In many cases, foreign
    direct investment simply means changing the ownership of companies
    and may have nothing to do with new real investment.

-   A great expansion of \'capital markets\' is not a sign of positive
    trends in capitalist production, just as a vast expansion of the
    insurance industry is not a sign that the world is becoming a safer
    place.

-   We will explore some of the terms used in financial systems,
    starting with the most obvious feature, their role in supplying
    credit. Credit co-operatives and building societies confined to the
    housing market play a similar role in supplying credit for people to
    purchase housing.

-   Banks are different because they are able to create new money in
    their credit operations. This means that far more money is
    circulating in the economy than the money derived from savings
    generated by past value creation.

-   Within capitalism, banks can be publicly owned and their financial
    criteria for operating are matters of public choice. The state is
    constantly interfering in their operations, even though one wants to
    keep these state functions \'low profile\'.

-   The existence of fictitious credit money is very beneficial for the
    whole economy because it facilitates the circulation of commodities
    and allows employers to raise large amounts of money for equipment
    which will yield up its full value in production only over many
    future years.

-   There have been several developments in the use of shares and bonds
    as means of raising funds. Shares are pieces of paper giving legal
    titles to a claim on future profits, and bonds are similar.

-   Shares and bonds are pieces of paper that entitle the holder to
    future royalties. The secondary markets in these securities are not
    contributing directly to productive capital investment, but are
    instead buying and selling claims on future value created in future
    productive activity.

-   A share in Ford Motors is a direct claim on future value created in
    Fords, while a Russian government bond is an indirect claim on
    future Russian production of value.

-   The phrase \'capital market\' refers to securities markets, and may
    have nothing directly to do with supplying funds for capital
    investment. Bank credits and bonds may be used for capital raising
    functions, but may equally be used for other purposes.

-   Rentiers and speculators are not integral elements in capitalism,
    because they derive their income from extracting royalties from
    future production and from trading in securities or currencies. The
    global capital markets are mainly about trading in royalties on
    future production and about insurance against risks.

-   The trend in the organization of the flows of finance has been
    increasingly one which privileges the interests of rentiers and
    speculators over the functional requirements of productive
    investment. This fact is revealed through an examination of the
    tensions between money-dealing capital and the employers of capital
    in the productive sector.

-   From the angle of the money capitalist, the circuit looks different.
    It starts with a fund of money, which is locked into a project for a
    certain time, and then the money capitalist hopes to get the money
    back with a royalty.

-   Property that can be used as capital appears simultaneously in two
    polarized embodiments: on one side stand the money capitalists
    controlling enormous accumulations of funds, and on the other stand
    the employers of capital managing the enterprises. This polarization
    is important because it enables money capital to play a planning
    role in capitalist development.

-   The relationship between the productive sector and the financial
    sector is one where the productive sector is determinant but the
    financial sector is dominant.

-   In the boom, productive capital can dictate terms to money
    capitalists, but in the recession, money capitalists become
    ruthless.

-   The state designs the relations between the money-capital pole and
    the productive capital pole, and between the money-capital pole and
    all parts of the credit system. It also designs its own relation
    with the financial pole.

-   A distinction emerges between the tempos and rhythms of two kinds of
    financial flows linked to the two different kinds of circuits: the
    money capitalist seeks quick returns and keeps capital in as liquid
    a state as possible, for reasons of safety; the employer of capital
    seeks to set up much longer-term circuits.

-   The relationship between capital and labor is a fundamental social
    relationship in the functioning of any actual capitalist system, and
    the relationship between money-capital and the productive sector is
    another fundamental social relationship. The story of the last
    quarter of a century has been the resurrection of the rentiers.

-   The debates concerning the institutional-power relations between
    money-capital and the employers of capital, as well as the role of
    the state and the forms of class relationships across the entire
    society, are not necessarily resolvable at a purely national level.

-   Neo-liberalism has transformed the relations between the
    money-capital pole and the productive sector of national
    capitalisms.

-   The need for an international monetary system arises from the fact
    that the world is divided into separate states with separate
    currencies and from the fact that groups within one state wish to do
    business with (and inside) other states.

-   The important point is that an international monetary system is
    necessary for the functioning of an international economy. If a
    state is heavily in deficit, people start to wonder whether it will
    be able to find the internationally acceptable money it needs to pay
    its international obligations.

-   The balance of payments system depends on the political division of
    the world into different states with different moneys, and the
    international monetary regime is established by political agreement
    among states. The biggest powers can lay down the rules, and the
    other states are regime takers.

-   Keynes and Dexter White wanted to construct a new international
    monetary system that would privilege international economic
    development, and that would be predictable and stable. They retained
    gold as the anchor of the system, and fixed the price of the dollar
    against gold.

-   The Keynes-White system banned private financial operators from
    moving funds around the world freely, giving the central banks of
    states great powers to control and prevent such financial movements.

-   The system seems to have worked very well, but was dismantled in the
    early 1970s by the Nixon administration.

-   The Nixon administration transformed the international monetary
    system in the early 1970s, in the teeth of opposition from all the
    other main capitalist powers, and in the context of acute tensions
    between the United States and Western Europe and Japan.

-   The Nixon administration scrapped Bretton Woods and imposed three
    key changes in international monetary relations: it ended the role
    of gold as a global monetary anchor, left the dollar as the
    overwhelmingly dominant international money, and ended the previous
    rules of fixed exchange rates between the main currencies.

-   The Nixon administration tried to take international financial
    relations out of the control of state Central Banks by exploiting US
    control over international oil supplies. The oil price rises were
    arranged in part by US influence on the oil states.

-   The Nixon administration wanted to use the US private banks to
    recycle petrodollars when OPEC increased oil prices, to increase the
    impact of US Treasury moves with the dollar. But the primary
    political objective was to deal a crippling blow to the Japanese and
    European economies.

-   Nixon\'s officials showed far more strategic insight than most
    political scientists would credit any government with, and were
    brilliant at deception.

-   The US government wanted to recycle the petrodollars from the Gulf
    through the Western banking systems to non-oil-producing states, but
    the other governments wanted to recycle them through the IMF. The US
    government was politically dominant in the Gulf, so it got its way.

-   The US got its way through unilateral actions, supplementing the
    petrodollar move with its own abolition of restrictions on the flow
    of funds into and out of the US.

-   The Nixon administration exploited a breach in the Bretton Woods
    system that had already existed since the 1950s, by allowing US
    banks to operate free of domestic US banking regulation by
    establishing operations in London.

-   The Nixon administration liberated private banks from international
    financial repression by providing incentives for such lending,
    including the removal of controls on the US capital account and
    scrapping the ceiling on the amount of a bank\'s total lending that
    could go to any single borrower.

-   Nixon\'s strategy of \'liberating\' international financial markets
    was based on the idea that doing so would strengthen the political
    power of the American state. This strategy actually worked to
    strengthen the political power and economic policy freedom of the
    US.

-   The rise of private international finance altered the basis upon
    which governments maintained the international stability of their
    own currencies. States with surpluses on their current account were
    still generally in a strong position, but the effective basis
    depended upon their creditworthiness in private international
    financial markets.

-   At first sight, these new arrangements might appear to be a
    liberation for governments from earlier rigidities, but in reality
    they were more restrictive. The new international monetary
    arrangements gave the United States government more influence over
    the international monetary and financial relations of the world than
    it had enjoyed under the Bretton Woods system. The US public
    authorities could shift trends in Anglo-American financial markets.

-   The new international monetary-financial regime was centered on the
    dollar, and Wall Street and its large London satellite were not the
    exclusive sources of finance. The two poles of this system \-- the
    Dollar and Wall Street \-- re-enforced each other.

-   The strength of Wall Street as a financial center re-enforced the
    dominance of the dollar, and the bigger a financial market\'s
    resources and reach, the safer it is likely to be and the more
    competitive its rates for borrowers are likely to be.

-   The size and depth of the US financial markets attracts people to
    the dollar area to place their funds.

-   The new regime of international money, based on the dollar, gives
    the American government an immensely potent political instrument,
    because the US does not need to earn dollars abroad to buy goods and
    services from abroad.

-   The US does not face the same balance of payments constraints as
    other countries, and can spend far more abroad than it earns from
    abroad.

-   When the dollar exchange rate changes, American companies that
    import or export are less affected than other countries. This allows
    the US government to swing the price of the dollar internationally
    this way and that having great economic consequences for the rest of
    the world.

-   The Nixon administration\'s victory in \'liberating\' the
    Anglo-American private banking systems for international operations
    had four key effects: it catapulted private banks into the center of
    international finance, opened up an enormous hole in the public
    supervision of international financial markets, and made other
    states increasingly vulnerable to developments in the American
    financial markets.

-   The City of London and the big, internationally oriented US
    money-center banks were the first beneficiaries of the liberation of
    international private finance. The City was a servicing center for
    the dollar currency zone and a satellite of Wall Street.

-   It is necessary to be precise about what this signifies. It does not
    mean that all financial markets of the world are unified in a
    single, integrated financial market, but that links between
    international financial markets and national financial systems
    around the world have been strengthened.

-   International private financial operations expanded from \$40bn in
    1975 to \$300bn in 1990, with bond lending increasing almost
    tenfold.

-   Talk of a global financial market obscures the power dimension of US
    financial dominance, because the American financial markets are
    dominant within the hierarchical networks of financial markets, and
    access to that market has enormous economic and political
    significance.

-   The Wall Street center has been pressing the target states to weaken
    the barriers to its penetration, give full rights to Wall Street
    operators to do business, and redesign the financial systems to fit
    Wall Street\'s business strategies.

-   Wall Street and London have not had a monopoly, but their size and
    the size of the funds they can mobilize have made them competitively
    decisive, and this has led to a corrosive process of undermining
    public regulation of financial operators within other states.

-   The dominance of Wall Street in private international finance meant
    that the American government, in alliance with the British
    authorities, had to decide whether to regulate banks. This led to a
    chain-reaction of effects and pressures on banking systems around
    the world. The US Federal Reserve could largely dictate the levels
    of international interest rates through moving US domestic interest
    rates, and thus determine the costs of credit internationally, with
    enormously powerful effects on other economies.

-   The US business cycle is impossible to predict with accuracy, and US
    policy is equally impossible to predict.

-   Washington managed the international tension between encouraging
    banks to take risks and preventing them from acting recklessly and
    collapsing.

-   When Washington has been happy to forget about regulating its
    international financial operators, other governments have been
    pressured to relax their regulations or find ways of evading what
    regulations exist. But when Washington has been happy to introduce
    regulation, it has achieved it with remarkable ease.

-   The result of the accord was a regulatory regime skewed towards
    serving US interests. It demonstrated just how easy it is for states
    to regulate international financial markets.

-   The US government discovered a way to bail out international
    financial operators without affecting the US banking and financial
    systems, and this solution was first hit upon during the Latin
    American international financial crisis.

-   The US government tried to extend the influence of Wall Street over
    international finance without putting its big commercial banks at
    risk.

-   Wall Street\'s dominance over international finance has political
    significance because it is interwoven with core control functions of
    capitalist states, and strengthening its linkages with national
    financial systems could weaken state control over these systems.

-   The state plays a central role in domestic monetary and financial
    affairs, and the state also plays a central role in international
    monetary and financial affairs. However, the political influence of
    states over the international monetary and financial system is not
    neatly parceled out between states.

-   Under the Bretton Woods regime, the US was overwhelmingly dominant
    but was constrained by the supranational rules of the system. Under
    the post-Nixon regime, the US was still overwhelmingly dominant but
    was not constrained by rule. The US government could decide the
    Dollar price and have the deciding influence on the evolving
    dynamics of international financial relations. The question is
    whether the US government would run the new Dollar-Wall Street
    Regime in the American national interest or in the collective global
    interest.

-   The US has refused to work towards a stable, rule-based system for
    international money and finance, and has instead driven the price of
    the main international currency up and down in wild swings without
    historical precedent.

-   There has been no public micro-regulation of the main private credit
    suppliers, except where the American government has wished to impose
    such regulation.

-   Public management of the interface between finance and the
    productive sector internationally is needed to provide incentives
    for channeling funds into productive activity, rather than
    speculation, insider trading, market rigging and corruption.

-   Several authors have suggested that US international monetary and
    financial policy has been bound by the rules of co-operative
    oligarchy with the rest of the G7. But the evidence for this is
    extremely weak.

-   The 1978 Bonn summit was an instance of co-operative policy-making,
    but the spirit vanished under Reagan.

-   The Plaza Accord to lower the dollar price in 1985 was a collegial
    agreement, but US Treasury Secretary Baker had already decided to
    bring down the dollar and had already started to bring it down.

-   The US government treated the IMF with contempt in the 1970s, then
    allowed it to sink towards oblivion in the late 1970s. The Reagan
    administration changed its tune towards these organizations because
    they were valuable tools of American economic statecraft.

-   A whole academic paradigm has been constructed in the United States
    to justify US unilateralism in international monetary affairs. This
    paradigm has been intellectually demolished, but it at least tries
    to explain US governments\' extraordinary behavior in international
    monetary affairs. A new international regime for money and financial
    relations was created in the 1970s, and the dynamics of this regime
    were inescapably and integrally tied to the behavior of one state in
    the inter-state system (the USA) and of one financial market (Wall
    Street).
