202404061545

Status: #book

Tags: #history

Title: The American Counterculture: A History of Hippies and Cultural Dissidents

Author: Damion R. Back

Citation:
Bach, Damon R.. The American Counterculture: A History of Hippies and Cultural Dissidents. United States, University Press of Kansas, 2020.


---
# References
# The American Counterculture

## Introduction

What the book intends on addressing:

\"This work aims to answer the following fundamental questions: What
main forces, themes, and events caused the counterculture's
materialization? What circumstances led to its decline? What were its
parameters? When did it peak? Were there recognizably distinct periods
in its evolution? What values and social philosophies did it manifest
and espouse and did they change over time? Where and when did hippie
communities sprout forth outside of San Francisco? What themes and
developments have not received adequate treatment? What was the
counterculture's as- sociation to the New Left and other social
movements? What are its legacies? How did it change America?\" (XI)

-   It also ventures into how and why activist shifted their attention
    from national to local issues

-   As well as what seemed like a phenomenon in certain locations in the
    60s to an activation for millions by 1974

-   What distinguished certain movements from the 60s to the early 70s

-   Political revolution in mid to late 60s, to cultural revolutions in
    70s (?)

"By the early 1970s the counterculture had successfully created
microsocieties in most major cities, building a host of
counterinstitutions in the form of free stores, free schools, and free
clinics." (XIII)

"The Grateful Dead saw themselves as 'signposts to new space.'" (Ibid.)

-   Counterculture was a reaction to the cold war (society)

Counterculture definition from XV-XVI

-   Cultural rebels that rejected the traditions, conventions, values,
    and lifestyles of American mainstream and middle class.

**A point of disagreement:** counterculture was initiated by a white
middle class American.

-   67'-70' -- Age of Aquarius

-   Era where counterculture became more mainstream. Rock concerts,
    peace, love, flower power, and confrontation of war makers

-   Counterculture was always divided

-   By 71, political activist and counter culturist partnered in
    business (co-ops, clinics, education, etc.)

-   By 72-74, many counterculturist became political activist. They
    became preoccupied with political change , rather than disengagement
    as in the 60s decade (disagree?)

-   He really likes the Grateful Dead

## C.1

-   Stuck to the idea that white America founded counterculture, in
    spite of reading Theories that Black culture and movements was one
    of the major influences

-   Alienation comes to mind, but not as Fanon or Marx put it.

Fanon: "to designate conditions of separation of the individual from his
individuality, his culture, or his existential condition." (3)

-   Culture, govt., war, alienated the youth

-   "The soul of hip . . . is dysfunction" (Ibid.) = Hip is alienation ,
    defined by Detroit *Fifth Estate*

-   Many middle class children , later in life, felt as though the 50s
    was a repressive decade

"'In *Woodstock Nation*, published in 1969, Abbie Hoffman identified the
'thorns of the flower children.' Young people, he wrote, "were sick of
being programmed by an educational system void of excitement, creativity
and sensuality. A system that channeled human beings like so many
laboratory rats with electrodes rammed up their asses into a highly
mechanized maze of class rankings, degrees, careers, neon supermarkets,
military-industrial complexes, suburbs, repressed sexuality, hypocrisy,
ulcers, and psychoanalysts.'" (4)

-   Red scare can be an attributor to counter-movements. (Harmony v.
    discord, peace v. war, acceptance of difference of ideas v. dissent)

-   After the WW2 American ideologies of prosperities flourished --
    plastics, and industry boomed -- creating the idea that American
    democracy can spread to other parts of the globe

-   What was met was the Cold War, fear of communist influence --
    spheres of influence

"\[Truman\], In March 1947, before a joint session of Congress, he
articulated the Truman Doctrine, a comprehensive American foreign policy
for the postwar world ... It encompassed "containment," and set the
stage for far-reaching military commitments." (6)

"Turkey faced aggression from Russia looking to establish a greater
naval presence in the Mediterranean. Britain could no longer maintain
its economic and military commitments in this sphere, so America moved
to assume responsibility." (Ibid).

"To protect its people, allies, and strategic interests, Washington
embarked on a massive military buildup. In the spring of 1950 Truman's
National Security Council produced NSC-68, a document that further
clarified and defined containment." (7)

-   NSC-68 sought to expand its military so that the U.S could maintain
    its interest around the globe

-   50' \$13b in military spending to \$50b by 53'

-   40' defense spending was 13% of the budget by 59' it was half

-   54' policy "New Look," by John Foster Dulles

"Instead of maintaining a large and costly army, the United States could
threaten adversaries with less expensive nuclear weapons---\'more bang
for the buck.'" (8)

-   The red scare allowed for the Govt. to crack down on "dissenters"
    because of the general public view

-   A Black shoe shiner was investigated 70 times because of his
    donation to the Scottsboro Boy's Defense Fund abolished by Truman
    and Eisenhower

-   McCarthy in Feb. 50' delivered a speech about having a list of 205
    communist working in the State Dept., he had no actual list. He
    never discovered a communist that the intelligence agencies already
    had

-   49' -- 54' hysteria and paranoia was abundant

-   Even Robin Hood was attacked

"Books written by the broad left and black authors, and those favorable
to left-wing causes---civil rights, nuclear disarmament, world
peace---were often pulled. So, too, were volumes critical of the
government and capitalism" (11)

-   Life felt repressive after the war (sex, education, etc.) See pages
    12-18.

"Properity" flourished. A large swath of Americans demanded more goods
after the War. "The good life entailed consumption. Affluence fostered
consumerism and materialism. Americans had saved \$100 billion during
the war." Demanding exported goods. (18-19)

"Advertisers spent \$5.7 billion a year in 1950 and \$11.9 billion by
1960 in order to convince consumers to purchase their products. Many
lived on credit and went into debt." (19)

"Unfortunately, the mid-fifties era of repose ended during Eisenhower's
second term. Even before Ike's second inaugural, the nation experienced
setbacks in foreign relations and affairs. Britain, France, and Israel
invaded the Suez region after Egyptian leader Gamal Abdel Nasser
nationalized the Suez Canal. Eisenhower pressured Britain, France, and
Israel to withdraw, souring America's relations with those countries,
while weakening, it seemed, Western unity." (19)

-   57' Little Rock shook the world

-   The 50s created a counterculture against the backdrop of a plastic
    society

"'That ain't no freedom at all, we said. Fuck that stuff and let's get
us a rock and roll band together.'"

-   Book sucks!

-   An assault against the status quo in the 50s and 60s

    -   Bill Haley "Rock around the clock" in 54' was admonished because
        it represented something that only belonged to the people (who?)

-   Rock and Roll had represented what was outside of white middle class
    America

-   Although Rock has its roots in African Rhythms, and this was
    appalling to the right conservative Christian populous -- it was
    often referred to as "nigger music"

-   The rebellions during the 50s (within music and its culture) were
    associated with blackness

-   Beat poetry had a significant impact on boomers, but their impact
    was different as:

    -   Beat poetry was "sad, dark, and lonely, the music of jazz"

    -   Hippies are bright and vivacious , not lonely

-   The "Silent Generation"

-   College admissions tripled in the 60s. Boomers were preparing for
    traditional life

-   Alienation was the path during the postwar era

-   White flight was also prevalent during this time as they feared
    African American moving into the city

    -   The black community was plagued with violence, inequity, and
        economic instability -- Jim crow proliferated this

    -   Civil Rights grew to prominence during the mid-50s

-   Nuclear fears were surmounting with USSR, Korean War, and Cuban
    missile crisis

## C.2

-   Two aspects differentiate counter culture between 65' to 67'

    -   One, difference between hippiedom and new left philosophy and
        style

    -   Two, "alienated by harassment, campus paternalism, and
        bureaucracy---and especially the brutal war in Vietnam---the
        counterculture burgeoned on the coasts, and later in the
        heartland." (37)

-   Vietnam war left the youth in state were all forms of war was
    unconscionable

-   Students protested universities all across the U.S by the mid-60's

-   The university and military colluded together since WWII with the
    Manhattan bomb project -- the university became central to
    developing new tech., consumer products, and trained experts for the
    military

"in 1957 the Soviets launched Sputnik, igniting the space race. Public
dollars poured into higher education. Total spending on universities
spiraled from over \$740 million in 1945 to nearly \$7 billion in 1965.
The massive baby boom generation also fueled expansion. From 1963 to
1973, college enrollments doubled, from 4.7 to 9.6 million. Annual
growth rates quadrupled." (41)

-   See "counterculture" values pages 45 -- 48

-   Sex was more openly discussed , censorship struck down in 53'

-   Drugs had come into use more, notably LSD and Weed -- see pages 50
    -- 60

-   Bob Dylan was revered because he was an example of what the general
    counterculture movements disdained: racism, war, jim crow, cold war,
    militarism -- see page 60-61

-   Dylan was influenced by the Beatles -- he turned to the electric
    fender

-   Dylan's shift to rock was seen as a sellout -- older generations
    were offended

-   See page 62 on Dylan's songs

-   Beatles had a more prominent presence in the wake of rock and roll

"The Beatles brought African American music back to its homeland,
reintroducing it to young whites, with raucous, hard-driving covers of
Berry's "Rock and Roll Music," the Isley Brothers' "Twist and Shout,"
Larry Williams's "Dizzy Miss Lizzy," and Little Richard's "Long Tall
Sally."" (63)

"The Rolling Stones invaded America through the breach the Beatles had
opened. The band recorded African American music, covering songs by
Chuck Berry, Marvin Gaye, Wilson Pickett, and bluesmen Slim Harpo and
Howlin' Wolf." (65)

-   Michael J. Kramer assigns rock as the biggest influence to
    counterculture as it molded the flux of identity shifts within the
    period (66)

-   Communes provided escapism from the grim realities of American
    culture and politics -- see pages 67 through 69

-   *Research dancehall concerts in the 60s and situationist, Fluxus,
    and happenings*

-   Difference between counter culturalist and the new left was
    passivity vs. activity

    -   Counterculturist fled into communes or were passive to protest ,
        while the new left were active and demonstrated -- see pages 76
        -- 80

-   In spite of the differences between the left and counterculturist, a
    majority of America saw them as a threat to American life

## C.3

-   Between 67' and 70' counterculturalist and leftist began to
    intermingle after the onset of the 60s: the Vietnam war, civil
    rights, protest, rock and roll, etc.

-   By the end of the 60s a large population of counterculturalist had
    amassed

    -   Within that fractions/divisions

    -   Universities swath with counterculturalist

    -   Love-ins

-   Counterculturalist found it hard to fit in within their own movement
    as it was founded on stolen black culture, in which black and brown
    individuals disowned their choices

-   See pages 110-116

-   Book still sucks!

-   By the end of 60s early 70s, a lot of counterculturalist traditions
    had come into question: drug use, political activation,

-   In 68', counterculturalist became more active within protest and the
    left became more active within counterculture

-   Police were adversarial for hippies

-   Towards the end of the 60s, even some in the military began to use
    hippie slogans on their uniform

## C.4

-   Environmentalism became a concern for counterculturalist in the
    early 70s ; although, they were not responsible for the
    environmental movements , as they predate them

-   Rachel Carlson *Silent Spring* was very influential during the early
    60s for environmental movements

-   Many hippies and purist were not involved in movements still

-   Nobody liked Nixon

-   Youth felt betrayed by the govt.

-   "New Left--counterculture fusion also occurred because nearly all
    rebellious youth pursued cultural radicalism." (199)

-   Rock festivals were capital investments , Woodstock specifically

    -   See David Harvey on the rise of neoliberalism and the rise of
        countercultures -- they need each other

-   "The counterculture was a genuine counter to Cold War culture,
    producing its own values, music, art, literature, language, and
    clothing, but, in the early 1970s, it also became a countersociety."
    (232)

